



[Illustration: DAVID COPPERFIELD AND LITTLE EMILY.]




                         *Stories From Dickens*


                                   BY

                         *J. WALKER McSPADDEN*

             _Author of "Stories of Robin Hood," "Synopses
                      of Dickens’s Novels," etc._



                                NEW YORK
                       THOMAS Y. CROWELL COMPANY
                               PUBLISHERS




                            COPYRIGHT, 1906
                     BY THOMAS Y. CROWELL & COMPANY




                               *Preface*


The title of this book rings in the ear with a pleasant sound.  "Stories
from Dickens"!  "Stories" alone usually suggests such delightful rambles
in the land of dreams!  And when it is coupled with the name of a king
of story-tellers by divine right, the charm is increased a hundredfold.

These stories are—as the title indicates—taken directly from Dickens,
very largely in his own language, and always faithful to his spirit.
They are the stories of his most famous boys and girls, merely separated
from the big books and crowded scenes where they first appeared. In
stage talk, the "lime-light" has been turned upon them alone.  Their
early joys and sorrows are shown, but always with more of the smiles
than the tears.  There is sadness enough in real life without
emphasizing it in books for young people, and so only two of the
numerous deathbed scenes found in Dickens are given place here.

The book is not intended as a substitute, however small, for the
complete texts; but is offered in the reverent hope that it will serve
as both introduction and incentive to the bulky volumes which so often
alarm young people by their very size.  The compiler has in mind one
child of the "long ago" who looked with awe upon a stately row of fat
books kept for show, like mummies in a high glass case, and labelled
"Dickens."  This child never suspected that the books were intended for
reading—at any rate, not by children; so he contented himself for the
time with trashy little books with highly colored pictures "intended for
children."  What a world of delight would have been opened to him if
some one had placed in his hands the story of Oliver Twist; or the first
part of Nicholas Nickleby relating to Dotheboy’s Hall; or the early
history of David Copperfield (he might have demanded _all_ of _that_
story!); or some of the inimitable Christmas tales!  Afterwards he would
have read on and on for himself.

To other such children this book comes as a friendly guide to
Dickens-land.

It is barely necessary to add that the book is in different vein from an
earlier handbook, "Synopses of Dickens’s Novels," which is a quick guide
and index to all the plots and characters in full.

J.W.M.

NEW YORK CITY,
       May, 1906.




                               *Contents*

*THE STORY OF OLIVER TWIST:*

I.  Oliver Begins Life in a Hard Way
II.  Oliver Falls from Bad to Worse
III.  Oliver Makes his Way into Good Society
IV.  The End of Evil Days


*THE STORY OF SMIKE AND HIS TEACHER:*

I.  How Nicholas Nickleby Came to Dotheboys Hall
II.  How Smike Went Away from Dotheboys Hall


*THE STORY OF LITTLE NELL:*

I.  In the Old Curiosity Shop
II.  Out in the Wide World
III.  At the End of the Journey


*THE STORY OF PAUL AND FLORENCE DOMBEY:*

I.  The House of Dombey and Son
II.  How Florence Came into her Own


*THE STORY OF PIP AS TOLD BY HIMSELF:*

I.  How Pip Helped the Convict
II.  Pip and Estella
III.  How Pip Fell Heir to Great Expectations


*THE STORY OF LITTLE DORRIT:*

I.  The Child of the Marshalsea
II.  How the Prison Gates were Opened


*THE PERSONAL HISTORY OF DAVID COPPERFIELD:*

I.  My Earliest Recollections
II.  I Fall into Disgrace
III.  School.  Steerforth and Traddles
IV.  I Begin Life on my Own Account




                      *THE STORY OF OLIVER TWIST*



                 *I.  OLIVER BEGINS LIFE IN A HARD WAY*


Some years ago when the poorhouses of England were in a bad state and
the poor people housed within them were often ill-treated, a little waif
began his life under the roof of one of the worst of them.  His mother
had wandered there, weak, wretched and without friends, it seemed, for
she gave no clue to her identity; and after her little boy was born she
had only strength enough to kiss him once before she breathed her last.
As no one knew anything about her, the child became a charge upon the
parish.  He was sent with other orphans and homeless little ones to be
cared for by an elderly woman named Mrs. Mann, who received from the
parish officers but a scant allowance for the needs of the children, to
whom she gave, in the shape of food and attention, a still shorter
return.

And so the first years of this child’s life were devoted mainly to the
struggle to keep body and soul together.  He won the fight by the
narrowest of margins, and his ninth birthday found him a pale, thin lad,
somewhat short in stature and decidedly small in girth.  But nature had
placed a good sturdy spirit in his breast.  It had plenty of room to
expand, thanks to the spare diet, else he might not have had any ninth
birthday at all.

On this momentous day he received a visitor, in the person of Mr.
Bumble, the fat and pompous beadle of the workhouse, who came to see
Mrs. Mann in all the glory of his cocked hat and brass buttons.

"Good morning, ma’am," said the beadle, taking out a leathern
pocket-book.  "The child that was half baptized Oliver Twist is nine
year old to-day."

"Bless him!" interposed Mrs. Mann, inflaming her left eye with the
corner of her apron.

"And notwithstanding a offered reward of ten pound, which was afterwards
increased to twenty pound; notwithstanding the most superlative, and, I
may say, supernat’ral exertions on the part of this parish," said
Bumble, "we have never been able to discover who is his father, or what
was his mother’s settlement, name, or con-dition."

Mrs. Mann raised her hands in astonishment; but added, after a moment’s
reflection, "How comes he to have any name at all, then?"

The beadle drew himself up with great pride, and said, "I inwented it."

"You, Mr. Bumble!"

"I, Mrs. Mann.  We name our foundlings in alphabetical order.  The last
was a S,—Swubble, I named him.  This was a T,—Twist I named _him_.  The
next one as comes will be Unwin, and the next Vilkins.  I have got names
ready made to the end of the alphabet, and all the way through it again,
when we come to Z."

"Why, you’re quite a literary character, sir!" said Mrs. Mann.

"Well, well," said the beadle, evidently gratified with the compliment;
"perhaps I may be.  But the boy Oliver being now too old to remain here,
the Board have determined to have him back into the house.  I have come
out myself to take him there.  So let me see him at once."

"I’ll fetch him directly," said Mrs. Mann, leaving the room for that
purpose.  And so Oliver, having had as much of the outer coat of dirt
which encrusted his face and hands removed as could be scrubbed off in
one washing, was presently led into the room.

"Make a bow to the gentleman, Oliver," said Mrs. Mann.

Oliver made a bow, which was divided between the beadle on the chair and
the cocked hat on the table.

"Will you go along with me, Oliver?" said Mr. Bumble, in a majestic
voice.

Oliver was about to say that he would go along with anybody with great
readiness, when, glancing upwards, he caught sight of Mrs. Mann, who had
got behind the beadle’s chair, and was shaking her fist at him with a
furious countenance.  He took the hint at once, for the fist had been
too often impressed upon his body not to be deeply impressed upon his
memory.

"Will _she_ go with me?" he inquired.

"No, she can’t," replied Mr. Bumble, "but she’ll come and see you
sometimes."

This was no very great consolation to the child.  Young as he was,
however, he had sense enough to pretend great regret at going away.  It
was no very difficult matter for the boy to call the tears into his
eyes.  Hunger and recent ill-usage are great assistants if you want to
cry; and Oliver cried very naturally indeed.  Mrs. Mann gave him a
thousand embraces, and, what Oliver wanted a great deal more, a piece of
bread and butter, lest he should seem too hungry when he got to the
workhouse.  With the slice of bread in his hand, and the little
brown-cloth parish cap on his head, the boy was then led away by Mr.
Bumble from the wretched home where one kind word or look had never
lighted the gloom of his infant years.

Mr. Bumble walked on with long strides, and little Oliver, firmly
grasping his gold-laced cuff, trotted beside him; inquiring at the end
of every quarter of a mile whether they were "nearly there."  To these
interrogations Mr. Bumble returned very brief and snappish replies; for
was he not a beadle?  But at last they were there, and the boy was
looking at his new home with interest not unmixed with dread.

Oliver had not been within the walls of the workhouse a quarter of an
hour, and had scarcely completed the slice of bread, when Mr. Bumble,
who had handed him over to the care of an old woman, returned, and,
telling him it was a board night, took him before that august body
forthwith.

"Bow to the Board," said Bumble.  Oliver brushed away two or three tears
that were lingering in his eyes, and seeing no board but the table,
fortunately bowed to that.

"What’s your name, boy?" said a gentleman in a high chair.

Oliver was frightened at the sight of so many fat, red-faced gentlemen,
and the beadle gave him another tap behind, which made him cry. These
two causes made him answer in a very low and hesitating voice; whereupon
a gentleman in a white waistcoat said he was a fool,—which was a capital
way of raising his spirits and putting him quite at his ease.

"Boy," said the gentleman in the high chair, "listen to me.  You know
you’re an orphan, I suppose?"

"What’s that, sir?" inquired poor Oliver.

"The boy _is_ a fool—I thought he was," said the gentleman in the white
waistcoat.

"Hush!" said the gentleman who had spoken first.  "You know you’ve got
no father or mother, and that you were brought up by the parish, don’t
you?"

"Yes, sir," replied Oliver, weeping bitterly.

"What are you crying for?" inquired the gentleman in the white
waistcoat.  And, to be sure, it was very extraordinary.  What _could_
the boy be crying for?

"I hope you say your prayers every night," said another gentleman, in a
gruff voice, "and pray for the people who feed you, and take care of
you—like a Christian."

"Yes, sir," stammered the boy.  The gentleman who spoke last was
unconsciously right. It would have been _very_ like a Christian, and a
marvellously good Christian too, if Oliver had prayed for the people who
fed and took care of _him_.  But he hadn’t, because nobody had taught
him.

"Well!  You have come here to be educated, and taught a useful trade,"
said the red-faced gentleman in the high chair.

"So you’ll begin to pick oakum to-morrow morning at six o’clock," added
the surly one in the white waistcoat.

For the combination of both these blessings in the one simple process of
picking oakum, Oliver bowed low, by the direction of the beadle, and was
hurried away to a large ward, where, on a rough hard bed, he sobbed
himself to sleep.

Poor Oliver!  He little knew, as he fell asleep, that the Board had just
reached a sage decision in his and other cases.  But they had, and this
was it.  The members of this Board were very wise men, and when they
came to turn their attention to the work-house, they found out at once,
what ordinary folks would never have discovered—that the poor people
liked it!

"Oho!" said the Board, "we’ll stop all this high living in no time!"  So
they brought the diet down to the edge of starvation.  They contracted
with the waterworks to lay on an unlimited supply of water, and with a
mill to supply small quantities of oatmeal; and issued three meals of
thin gruel a day, and half a roll on Sundays.

For the first six months after Oliver Twist was removed, the system was
in full operation. It was rather expensive at first, in consequence of
the increase in the undertaker’s bill, and the necessity of taking in
the clothes of all the paupers, which fluttered loosely on their wasted,
shrunken forms, after a week or two’s gruel. But the number of workhouse
inmates got thin as well as the paupers, and the Board were delighted.

The room in which the boys were fed was a large stone hall, with a
copper kettle at one end, out of which the master, dressed in an apron
for the purpose, and assisted by one or two women, ladled the gruel at
meal times.  Of this festive composition each boy had one porringer, and
no more—except on occasions of great public rejoicing, when he had two
ounces and a quarter of bread besides.  The bowls never wanted washing.
The boys polished them with their spoons till they shone again; and when
they had performed this operation (which never took very long, the
spoons being nearly as large as the bowls), they would sit staring at
the kettle, with eager eyes, as if they could have devoured the very
bricks of which it was composed; employing themselves, meanwhile, in
sucking their fingers, with the view of catching up any stray splashes
of gruel that might have been cast thereon.

[Illustration: OLIVER ASKS FOR MORE.]

Boys have generally excellent appetites. Oliver Twist and his companions
suffered the tortures of slow starvation for three months, until at last
they got so voracious and wild with hunger that one boy, who was tall
for his age and hadn’t been used to that sort of thing (for his father
had kept a small cook’s shop), hinted darkly to his companions that
unless he had another basin of gruel, he was afraid he might eat the boy
who slept next him, who happened to be a weakly youth of tender age. He
had a wild hungry eye, and they implicitly believed him.  A council was
held, and lots were cast to decide who should walk up to the master
after supper that evening and ask for more; and it fell to Oliver Twist.

The evening arrived, and the boys took their places.  The master, in his
cook’s uniform, stationed himself at the kettle; his pauper assistants
ranged themselves behind him; the gruel was served out, and a long grace
was said over the short rations.  The gruel disappeared; the boys
whispered to each other, and winked at Oliver, while his next neighbors
nudged him. Child as he was, he was desperate with hunger and reckless
with misery.  He rose from the table and advancing to the master, basin
and spoon in hand, said, somewhat alarmed at his own temerity:

"Please, sir, I want some more."

The master was a fat, healthy man, but he turned very pale.  He gazed in
stupefied astonishment on the small rebel for some seconds, and then
clung for support to the copper.  The assistants were paralyzed with
wonder; the boys with fear.

"What!" said the master at length, in a faint voice.

"Please, sir," replied Oliver, "I want some more."

The master aimed a blow at Oliver’s head with the ladle, pinioned him in
his arms, and shrieked aloud for the beadle.

The Board were sitting in solemn conclave, when Mr. Bumble rushed into
the room in great excitement, and, addressing the gentleman in the high
chair, said:

"Mr. Limbkins, I beg your pardon, sir! Oliver Twist has asked for more!"

There was a general start.  Horror was depicted on every countenance.

"For _more_!" said Mr. Limbkins.  "Compose yourself, Bumble, and answer
me distinctly. Do I understand that he asked for more, after he had
eaten the supper allotted by the dietary?"

"He did, sir," replied Bumble.

"That boy will be hung," said the gentleman in the white waistcoat.  "I
know that boy will be hung."

Nobody disputed this opinion.  An animated discussion took place.
Oliver was ordered into instant confinement; and a bill was posted on
the outside of the gate, offering a reward of five pounds to anybody who
would take Oliver Twist off the hands of the parish.  In other words,
five pounds and Oliver Twist were offered to any man or woman who wanted
an apprentice to any trade, business, or calling.

Oliver had a very narrow escape a few days later, as the result of this
bill, from a villanous-looking man who wanted a chimney-sweep.  But
finally he became the apprentice of an undertaker named Sowerberry.  His
life here was some improvement over the workhouse, but still hard
enough.  Nevertheless he did get enough to eat, in the shape of broken
victuals, and he slept among the coffins in the shop.

Unfortunately there was another apprentice, a great overgrown fellow
named Noah Claypole, who delighted to bully Oliver in every way
possible.  Oliver stood it as long as he could, but Noah mistook his
attitude for cowardice and added insults to rough usage.  But, one day,
Noah spoke ill of the boy’s dead mother.

"What did you say?" asked Oliver quickly.

"A regular right-down bad ’un, she was, Work’us," repeated Noah coolly.

Crimson with fury, Oliver started up, overthrew the chair and table,
seized Noah by the throat, shook him, in the violence of his rage, till
his teeth chattered in his head, and, collecting his whole force into
one heavy blow, felled him to the ground.

A minute ago, the boy had looked the quiet, mild, dejected creature that
harsh treatment had made him.  But his spirit was roused at last; the
cruel insult had set his blood on fire.  His breast heaved, and he
defied his tormentor with an energy he had never known before.

"He’ll murder me!" blubbered Noah. "Charlotte! missis!  Here’s the new
boy a-murdering of me!  Help! help!  Oliver’s gone mad!  Char-lotte!"

His cries brought the fat maid-servant running to the scene.

"Oh, you little wretch!" screamed Charlotte, seizing Oliver with her
utmost force, which was about equal to that of a strong man in good
training.  "Oh, you little un-grate-ful, mur-der-ous, hor-rid villain!"
And between every syllable Charlotte gave Oliver a blow with all her
might, accompanying it with a scream, for the benefit of society.

Charlotte’s fist was by no means a light one; but, lest it should not be
effectual in calming Oliver’s wrath, Mrs. Sowerberry plunged into the
kitchen, and assisted to hold him with one hand while she scratched his
face with the other. In this favorable position of affairs Noah rose
from the ground and pommelled him behind.

This was rather too violent exercise to last long.  When they were all
three wearied out and could tear and beat no longer, they dragged
Oliver, struggling and shouting but nothing daunted, into the
dust-cellar, and there locked him up.  This being done, Mrs. Sowerberry
sank into a chair and burst into tears.

"Oh, Charlotte!" she cried; "what a mercy we have not all been murdered
in our beds, with such a little villain in the house!"

And when Mr. Sowerberry presently came home, he gave Oliver a whipping
on his own account for good measure.

It was not until he was left alone in the silence and stillness of the
cellar that Oliver gave way to the feelings which the day’s treatment
had awakened.  He had listened to their taunts with a look of contempt;
he had borne the lash without a cry, for he felt that pride swelling in
his heart which would have kept down a shriek to the last, though they
had roasted him alive.  But now, when there was none to see or hear him,
he fell upon his knees on the floor, and, hiding his face in his hands,
wept bitter tears.

For a long time Oliver remained motionless in this attitude.  The candle
was burning low in the socket when he rose to his feet.  Having gazed
cautiously round him and listened intently, he gently undid the
fastenings of the door and looked abroad.

It was a cold, dark night.  The stars seemed, to the boy’s eyes, farther
from the earth than he had ever seen them before.  There was no wind,
and the sombre shadows thrown by the trees upon the ground looked
sepulchral and death-like, from being so still.  He softly re-closed the
door.  He resolved to run away in the early morning—to go to that great
city of London.

With the first ray of light that struggled through the crevices in the
shutters, Oliver arose, and again unbarred the door.  One timid look
around,—one moment’s pause of hesitation,—he had closed it behind him,
and was in the open street.

He looked to the right and to the left, uncertain whither to fly.  He
remembered to have seen the wagons, as they went out, toiling up the
hill.  He took the same route, and arriving at a footpath across the
fields, which he knew led out again into the road, struck into it and
walked quickly on.

He was then only ten years old.




                 *II.  OLIVER FALLS FROM BAD TO WORSE*


It was seventy miles to London, and the poor boy made his way thither
only with great difficulty.  Begging was not allowed in many of the
villages, and nearly everybody viewed him with doubt, or else shut the
door in his face.

Early on the seventh morning of his flight Oliver limped slowly into the
little town of Barnet, near the outskirts of London.  The
window-shutters were closed, the street was empty, and the boy sank down
with bleeding feet and covered with dust upon a door-step.

By degrees the shutters were opened, the window-blinds were drawn up,
and people began passing to and fro.  Some few stopped to gaze at Oliver
for a moment or two, or turned round to stare at him as they hurried by;
but none relieved him, or troubled themselves to inquire how he came
there.  He had no heart to beg, and there he sat.

He had been crouching on the step for some time when he was roused by
observing that a boy, who had passed him carelessly some minutes before,
had returned, and was now surveying him most earnestly from the opposite
side of the way.  He took little heed of this at first; but the boy
remained in the same attitude of close observation so long that Oliver
raised his head and returned his steady look.  Upon this the boy crossed
over, and, walking close up to Oliver, said:

"Hullo! my covey, what’s the row?"

The boy who addressed this inquiry was about his own age, but one of the
queerest-looking fellows Oliver had ever seen.  He was a snub-nosed,
flat-browed, common-faced boy enough, and as dirty as one would wish to
see; but he had about him all the airs and manners of a man.  He was
short of his age, with rather bow legs, and little, sharp, ugly eyes.
He wore a man’s coat, which reached nearly to his heels.  He had turned
the cuffs back, half-way up his arm, to get his hands out of the
sleeves, apparently with the ultimate view of thrusting them into the
pockets of his corduroy trousers, for there he kept them.  He was
altogether as swaggering a young gentleman as ever stood four feet six,
or something less, in his shoes.

"Hullo! my covey, what’s the row?" said this strange young gentleman to
Oliver.

"I am very hungry and tired," replied Oliver, the tears standing in his
eyes as he spoke.  "I have walked a long way.  I have been walking these
seven days."

The boy looked at him narrowly, and asked him some questions.  He took
Oliver for a vagrant or worse, but led him into a small tavern, and gave
him a feast of ham and bread; and Oliver, falling to at his new friend’s
bidding, made a long and hearty meal, during the progress of which the
strange boy eyed him from time to time with great attention.

"Going to London?" said the strange boy, when Oliver had at length
concluded.

"Yes."

"Got any lodgings?"

"No."

"Money?"

"No."

The strange boy whistled, and put his arms into his pockets as far as
the big coat-sleeves would let them go.

"Do you live in London?" asked Oliver.

"Yes, I do when I’m at home," replied the strange boy.  "Want to go
along with me?  I know an old gen’elman as lives there wot’ll give you
lodgings for nothink."

The unexpected offer was too tempting to be resisted, especially when
Oliver was told that the old gentleman would doubtless get him a good
place without loss of time.  This led to a more friendly and
confidential chat, in which Oliver learned that his new friend’s name
was Jack Dawkins, commonly called "The Artful Dodger."

As Dawkins objected to entering London before nightfall, it was nearly
eleven o’clock before he piloted Oliver down some of the worst streets
of the city’s worst section.  Finally they entered a tumbledown
building, and groped their way up a rickety stairway.  Then Dawkins
threw open the door of a back room and drew Oliver in after him.

The walls and ceiling of the room were perfectly black with age and
dirt.  There was a deal table before the fire, upon which were a candle
stuck in a bottle, some pewter pots, bread and butter.  Several rough
beds were huddled side by side upon the floor.  Seated around the table
were four or five boys, none older than the Dodger, smoking long clay
pipes and drinking spirits with the air of middle-aged men.  But the
chief figure was an old shrivelled Jew, whose villanous face was offset
by a mass of matted red hair.  He was dressed in a greasy flannel gown,
and was busily at work frying sausages over a fire.

The boys crowded around Dawkins as he whispered a few words in the ear
of the Jew. Then they all turned, as did the Jew, and grinned at Oliver.

"This is him, Fagin," said Jack Dawkins; "my friend Oliver Twist."

The Jew made a low bow to Oliver, took him by the hand, and hoped he
should have the honor of his intimate acquaintance.  Upon this, the
young gentlemen with the pipes came round him, and shook both his hands
very hard—especially the one in which he held his little bundle.  One
young gentleman was very anxious to hang up his cap for him; and another
was so obliging as to put his hands in Oliver’s pockets, in order that,
as he was very tired, he might not have the trouble of emptying them
himself when he went to bed.

"We are very glad to see you, Oliver—very," said the Jew.  "Dodger, take
off the sausages, and draw a tub near the fire for Oliver."

Oliver ate his share, and the Jew then mixed him a glass of hot gin and
water, telling him he must drink it off directly, because another
gentleman wanted the tumbler.  Oliver did as he was desired.
Immediately afterwards, he felt himself gently lifted on to one of the
sacks, and then he sank into a deep sleep.

The next morning, Oliver watched the Jew, Dawkins, and Charley Bates,
another of the boys, play a curious game.  The old man would place a
purse and other valuables in his pockets, whereupon the boys would try
to slip them out without his knowledge.

Oliver didn’t understand in the least what it was all about, even when
Fagin gave him some lessons in the same game.  But he was to learn with
a shock, a few days later, when Bates and Dawkins took him with them for
a walk about town.

They were just emerging from a narrow court not far from the open square
in Clerkenwell, when the Dodger made a sudden stop, and, laying his
finger on his lip, drew his companions back again with the greatest
caution.

"What’s the matter?" demanded Oliver.

"Hush!" replied the Dodger.  "Do you see that old cove at the
book-stall?"

"The gentleman over the way?" said Oliver. "Yes, I see him."

"He’ll do," said the Dodger.

"A prime plant," observed Master Charley Bates.

Oliver looked from one to the other with surprise, but he was not
permitted to make any inquiries; for the two boys walked stealthily
across the road, and slunk close behind the old gentleman.  Oliver
walked a few paces after them, and, not knowing whether to advance or
retire, stood looking on in silent amazement.

The gentleman was a very respectable-looking person who had taken up a
book from the stall and was reading away as hard as if he were in his
own study.

What was Oliver’s horror and alarm as he stood a few paces off, looking
on with his eyelids as wide open as they would possibly go, to see the
Dodger plunge his hand into the gentleman’s pocket, and draw from thence
a handkerchief; to see him hand the same to Charley Bates; and finally
to behold them both running away round the corner at full speed!

Oliver saw in a flash that they were pickpockets, and that he would be
classed among them!  He turned to run—the worst possible thing to do—for
just then the gentleman missed his handkerchief and glanced around in
time to see Oliver scudding away for dear life; and shouting "Stop
thief!" made off after him, book in hand.

He was not alone in the cry, for Bates and Dawkins, willing to divert
attention from themselves, also shouted "Stop thief!" and joined in the
pursuit like good citizens.

"Stop thief!  Stop thief!"  There is a magic in the sound.  The
tradesman leaves his counter, and the carman his wagon; the butcher
throws down his tray; the baker his basket; the milkman his pail; the
errand-boy his parcels; the school-boy his marbles.  Away they run,
pell-mell, helter-skelter, slap-dash, tearing, yelling, screaming and
knocking down the passengers as they turn the corners.

"Stop thief!  Stop thief!"  The cry is taken up by a hundred voices, and
the crowd accumulates at every turning.  Away they fly, splashing
through the mud and rattling along the pavements.  Up go the windows,
out run the people, and lend fresh vigor to the cry, "Stop thief!  Stop
thief!"

Stopped at last!  A well-aimed blow laid Oliver upon the pavement.  Then
a policeman seized him by the collar and he was hustled off for trial
before a magistrate.

The magistrate was a surly boor who was in the habit of committing
prisoners to jail with the merest pretence of a trial.  It did not take
him long to decide that Oliver was a hardened criminal, in spite of the
protests of the kindly old gentleman whose pocket had been picked; and
the boy was, in fact, being carried away in a fainting condition, when
the bookseller whose shop had been the scene of action and who had
witnessed the whole thing, rushed in and declared Oliver’s innocence.

The poor child was thereupon released; and the old gentleman—Mr.
Brownlow by name—was so sorry for him, and so taken by his frank face,
that he took him to his own home and nursed him through a severe
illness, the result of all his early privations and recent trouble. Mr.
Brownlow even thought of adopting him, and, as soon as he was well
enough, let him have books to read out of his own well-stocked library,
greatly to the eager Oliver’s delight.

[Illustration: SIKES HAD HIM BY THE COLLAR.]

It did indeed seem as though the sky had cleared for the boy, but
instead still darker days were threatening.  Fagin the Jew heard of
Oliver’s escape with fear and anger.  He knew that it would never do for
the boy to tell what he knew about the thieves’ den.  Their one chance
of safety lay in seizing him again and making him a thief like
themselves, so that his mouth would be closed.

So Fagin called to his aid a burglar, a big, brutal fellow named Bill
Sikes, who always went around with a knotted stick and a surly dog.
Nancy, a poor girl of the streets, was also put upon the search, and
soon their united efforts were successful.

One day after Oliver had begun to grow strong, he was sent by Mr.
Brownlow on an errand to a bookshop.  He was well dressed in a new suit,
and had some books and a five-pound note of Mr. Brownlow’s.  It was not
far, but he accidentally turned down a by-street that was not exactly in
his way.  He started to turn back, when he heard a girl’s voice
screaming, "Oh, my dear brother!"  And he had hardly looked up to see
what the matter was, when he was stopped by having a pair of arms thrown
tight around his neck.

"Don’t!" cried Oliver, struggling.  "Let go of me!  Who is it?  What are
you stopping me for?"

The only reply to this was a great number of loud lamentations from the
young woman who had embraced him, and who had a little basket and a
large key in her hand.

"Oh, my gracious!" said the young woman, "I’ve found him!  Oh, Oliver!
Oliver!  Oh, you naughty boy, to make me suffer sich distress on your
account!  Come home, dear, come!  Oh, I’ve found him!  Thank gracious
goodness heavins, I’ve found him!"  With these exclamations the young
woman burst into another fit of crying.

"What’s the matter, ma’am?" inquired a woman.

"Oh, ma’am," replied the girl, "he ran away, near a month ago, from his
parents, who are hard-working and respectable people, and went and
joined a set of thieves and bad characters, and almost broke his
mother’s heart."

"Young wretch!" said the woman.

"I’m not," replied Oliver, greatly alarmed. "I don’t know her.  I
haven’t any sister, or father and mother either.  I’m an orphan; I live
at Pentonville."

"Oh, only hear him, how he braves it out!" cried the young woman.

"Why, it’s Nancy!" exclaimed Oliver, who had known her at the Jew’s, and
now saw her face for the first time.

"You see he knows me!" cried Nancy, appealing to the bystanders.  "He
can’t help himself.  Make him come home, there’s good people, or he’ll
kill his dear mother and father, and break my heart!"

"What the devil’s this?" said a man, bursting out of a beer-shop, with a
white dog at his heels; "young Oliver!  Come home to your poor mother,
you young dog!  Come home, directly."

"I don’t belong to them.  I don’t know them.  Help! help!" cried Oliver,
struggling in the man’s powerful grasp.

"Help!" repeated the man.  "Yes; I’ll help you, you young rascal!  What
books are these?  You’ve been a stealing ’em, have you? Give ’em here."
With these words, the man tore the volumes from his grasp and struck him
on the head.

"That’s right!" cried a looker-on from a garret window.  "That’s the
only way of bringing him to his senses!"

"To be sure!" cried a sleepy-faced carpenter, casting an approving look
at the garret window.

"It’ll do him good!" said the woman.

"And he shall have it, too!" rejoined the man, administering another
blow, and seizing Oliver by the collar.  "Come on, you young villain!
Here, Bull’s-eye, mind him, boy!  Mind him!"

Weak from his recent illness and with no one in the idle crowd to
befriend him, poor Oliver could only suffer himself to be led away
sobbing.  Bill Sikes saw his advantage, and pushed him rapidly down the
street.  Then, turning to Oliver, he commanded him to take hold of
Nancy’s hand.

"Do you hear?" growled Sikes, as Oliver hesitated, and looked round.

They were in a dark corner, quite out of the track of passengers.
Oliver saw, but too plainly, that resistance would be of no avail. He
held out his hand, which Nancy clasped tight in hers.

"Give me the other," said Sikes.  "Here, Bull’s-eye!"

The dog looked up and growled.

"See here, boy!" said Sikes, putting his other hand to Oliver’s throat;
"if he speaks ever so soft a word, hold him!  D’ye mind?"

The dog growled again, and, licking his lips, eyed Oliver as if he were
anxious to attach himself to his windpipe without delay.

And in this fashion Oliver saw with unspeakable horror that he was being
taken back to the Jew.  What would the trusting Mr. Brownlow think of
him?  What, indeed!  The hot tears blinded Oliver’s eyes at the bare
thought.

Presently they arrived before the house but found it perfectly dark.

"Let’s have a glim," said Sikes, "or we shall go breaking our necks, or
treading on the dog. Look after your legs if you do!  That’s all."

"Stand still a moment, and I’ll get you one," replied a voice.  The
footsteps of the speaker were heard, and in another minute the form of
Mr. John Dawkins, otherwise the Artful Dodger, appeared.  He bore in his
right hand a tallow candle stuck in the end of a cleft stick.

The young gentleman did not stop to bestow any other mark of recognition
upon Oliver than a humorous grin; but, turning away, beckoned the
visitors to follow him.  As they entered the low, dingy room, they were
received with a shout of laughter.

"Oh, my wig, my wig!" cried Charley Bates; "here he is! oh, cry, here he
is!  Oh, Fagin, look at him; Fagin, do look at him!  I can’t bear it; it
is such a jolly game, I can’t bear it!  Hold me, somebody, while I laugh
it out."

With this, Master Bates laid himself flat on the floor, and kicked
convulsively for five minutes, in an ecstasy of joy.  Then jumping to
his feet, he snatched the cleft stick from the Dodger, and, advancing to
Oliver, viewed him round and round, while the Jew, taking off his
nightcap, made a great number of low bows to the bewildered boy.  The
Artful, meantime, who seldom gave way to merriment when it interfered
with business, rifled Oliver’s pockets thoroughly.

"Look at his togs, Fagin!" said Charley, putting the light so close to
his new jacket as nearly to set him on fire.  "Look at his
togs,—superfine cloth, and the heavy-swell cut!  Oh, my eye, what a
game!  And his books, too; nothing but a gentleman, Fagin!"

"Delighted to see you looking so well, my dear," said the Jew, bowing
with mock humility. "The Artful shall give you another suit, my dear,
for fear you should spoil that Sunday one. Why didn’t you write, my
dear, and say you were coming?  We’d have got something warm for
supper."

At this Master Bates roared again so loud that Fagin himself relaxed,
and even the Dodger smiled; but as the Artful drew forth the five-pound
note at that instant, it is doubtful whether the sally or the discovery
awakened his merriment.

"Hallo! what’s that?" inquired Sikes, stepping forward as the Jew seized
the note. "That’s mine, Fagin."

"No, no, my dear," said the Jew.  "Mine, Bill, mine.  You shall have the
books."

"They belong to Mr. Brownlow!" cried Oliver, wringing his hands.  "Oh,
pray send them back!  He’ll think I stole them!"

"The boy’s right," replied Fagin, with a sly wink.  "He _will_ think
you’ve stole them!"

Oliver saw by his look that all chance of rescue was gone, and shrieking
wildly he made a dash for the door.  But the dog arrested him with a
fierce growl, while a blow laid him upon the floor.

For several days Fagin kept him hid close, for fear of searching
parties.  Then, resolving to get the boy deeply into crime as soon as
possible, he forced him to accompany Bill Sikes upon a house-breaking
expedition.

Accordingly, one raw evening they set forth—Oliver, Sikes, and another
burglar, Toby Crackit—the ruffians threatening to shoot the boy if he so
much as uttered one word.  On account of his small size he was chosen to
creep through a little window of the house which was to be robbed.  The
opening was about five feet from the ground, and so small that the
inmates did not think it worth while to defend it securely.  But it was
large enough to admit a boy of Oliver’s size, nevertheless.

"Now listen, you young limb," whispered Sikes, drawing a dark-lantern
from his pocket and throwing the glare full in Oliver’s face: "I’m going
to put you through there.  Take this light and go softly up the steps
straight afore you, and along the little hall to the street door.
Unfasten it and let us in."

So saying, the burglar boosted Oliver up on his back, and put him
through the window.

"You see the stairs, don’t you?"

Oliver, more dead than alive, gasped out "Yes."  Sikes pointed the
pistol at him, and advised him to take notice that he was within shot
all the way.  Nevertheless, the boy had firmly resolved that, whether he
died in the attempt or not, he would make one effort to dart upstairs
from the hall and alarm the family. Filled with this idea, he advanced
at once, but stealthily.

"Come back!" suddenly cried Sikes aloud. "Back! back!"

Scared by the sudden breaking of the dead stillness of the place, and by
a loud cry which followed it, Oliver let his lantern fall, and knew not
whether to advance or fly.

The cry was repeated—a light appeared—a vision of two terrified
half-dressed men at the top of the stairs swam before his eyes—a flash—a
loud noise—a smoke—a crash somewhere, but where he knew not,—and he
staggered back.

Sikes had disappeared for an instant; but he was up again and had him by
the collar before the smoke had cleared away.

He fired his own pistol after the men, who were already retreating, and
dragged the boy up.

"Clasp your arm tighter," said Sikes, as he drew him through the window.
"Give me a shawl here.  They’ve hit him.  Quick!  How the boy bleeds!"

Then came the loud ringing of a bell, mingled with the noise of
firearms, and the shouts of men, and the sensation of being carried over
uneven ground at a rapid pace.  And then, the noises grew confused in
the distance.  A cold deadly feeling crept over the boy’s heart, and he
saw or heard no more.




             *III.  OLIVER MAKES HIS WAY INTO GOOD SOCIETY*


Bill Sikes and Toby Crackit were so hard pressed that they were soon
forced to leave Oliver lying in a ditch.  The hue and cry passed him to
one side, leaving him alone and unconscious through the long cold night.
Morning drew on apace.  The rain came down thick and fast, but Oliver
felt it not as it beat against him.

At length a low cry of pain broke the stillness; and uttering it, the
boy awoke.  His left arm, rudely bandaged in a shawl, hung heavy and
useless at his side; and the bandage was saturated with blood.  He was
so weak that he could scarcely raise himself into a sitting posture.
When he had at last done so, he looked feebly round for help, and
groaned with agony.  Trembling in every joint from cold and exhaustion,
he made an effort to stand upright; but, shuddering from head to foot,
fell prostrate on the ground.

After a short return of the stupor in which he had been so long plunged,
Oliver got upon his feet, and essayed to walk.  His head was dizzy, and
he staggered to and fro like a drunken man.  But he kept up,
nevertheless, and, with his head drooping languidly on his breast, went
stumbling onward, he knew not whither.

The rain was falling heavily now, but the cold drops roused him like
whiplashes.  He pressed forward with the last ounce of his strength,
feeling that if he stopped he must surely die, and by chance reached the
same house of the attempted burglary.  He knew the place at once, but
his strength was at an end, and he sank exhausted on the little portico
by the door.

The servants who presently opened the door were immensely surprised to
find the wounded boy; and two of them were certain he was the same who
had broken into the house.  But in his pitiful condition they put him to
bed and sent for a surgeon.

A very kind-hearted lady, Mrs. Maylie, and her adopted niece Rose, lived
here.  They cared for Oliver tenderly; for, like his lost friend, Mr.
Brownlow, they were greatly taken by his open face, and believed in him
despite the strange story which he presently found strength to tell.
With the aid of their friend the surgeon, they convinced the servants
that a mistake had been made, and so Oliver was not taken to jail.
Instead, he was received into this kindly home, and it really seemed
that now his dark days were over at last.

Oliver resumed the study of his beloved books, which he had begun with
Mr. Brownlow. But he also spent much time in the open fields, and soon
grew sturdy and strong, with the brown look of health in his face.
Between him and Rose Maylie a tender affection sprang up.  He was, in
fact, her devoted knight.

One beautiful evening, when the first shades of twilight were beginning
to settle upon the earth, Oliver sat at his window, intent upon his
books.  He had been poring over them for some time; and, as the day had
been uncommonly sultry, and he had exerted himself a great deal, by slow
degrees he fell asleep.

There is a kind of sleep that steals upon us sometimes, which, while it
holds the body prisoner, does not free the mind from a sense of things
about it, or enable it to ramble at its pleasure.

Oliver knew, perfectly well, that he was in his own little room; that
his books were lying on the table before him; that the sweet air was
stirring among the creeping plants outside. And yet he was asleep.
Suddenly, the scene changed; the air became close and confined; and he
thought, with a glow of terror, that he was in the Jew’s house again.
There sat the hideous old man, in his accustomed corner, pointing at
him, and whispering to another man, with his face averted, who sat
beside him.

"Hush, my dear!" he thought he heard the Jew say; "it is he, sure
enough.  Come away."

"He!" the other man seemed to answer; "could I mistake him, think you?
If a crowd of ghosts were to put themselves into his exact shape, and he
stood among them, there is something that would tell me how to point him
out!"

The man seemed to say this with such dreadful hatred, that Oliver awoke
with the fear and started up.

Good Heaven! what was that which sent the blood tingling to his heart,
and deprived him of his voice and of power to move! There—there—at the
window—close before him—so close that he could have almost touched him
before he started back—with his eyes peering into the room, and meeting
his—there stood the Jew!  And beside him were the scowling features of a
dark man whom Oliver had seen only once, but had instinctively learned
to fear.

It was but an instant, a glance, a flash, before his eyes, and they were
gone.  But they had recognized him, and he them.  He knew they were once
again lying in wait to seize him, and that his days of peace and
happiness were numbered.

Voice and motion came back to him with the fear; and leaping from the
window he called loudly for help.

Nevertheless, no trace of Fagin or the stranger could be found, though
the search was pursued with haste; and Oliver’s friends were forced to
believe that it had been only a feverish dream.

But Oliver had not been mistaken.  The two figures at the window were
really Fagin and a man named Monks, who for some mysterious reason had
been the boy’s most vindictive enemy.  It was he who had found Oliver
again and reported the fact to Fagin; and together they laid cunning
plans to get him once more into their clutches.

At this critical moment in Oliver’s welfare, an unexpected friend to him
appeared in the person of Nancy, the street-girl.  She had bitterly
repented her share in kidnapping him from Mr. Brownlow, and now longed
for a chance to do him some service.  The chance offered, when she
happened to overhear the interview between Monks and the Jew.  She could
not understand all she heard, but she realized that the boy was in great
danger unless she acted at once.

Hastening to the home of Rose Maylie, Nancy contrived to see her alone
and repeated word for word the conversation she had overheard.  From the
dark threats of this man Monks, it seemed that Oliver’s very life was in
danger, because of some secret connected with his birth.  Nancy knew
that it meant her own death also if her visit to Miss Maylie became
known, but she could not remain silent.

Miss Maylie listened to her story with horror and amazement.  She
realized that something must be done quickly, but did not know to whom
to turn.  In her perplexity Oliver made a discovery of great value to
both of them.  On the very day of Nancy’s hurried visit and no less
hurried departure he came running in, his eyes all aglow with
excitement.

"I have seen him!" he exclaimed excitedly; "I knew that if I kept on
looking, I should find him again, one day!  I mean the gentleman who was
so good to me—Mr. Brownlow!"

"Where?" asked Rose.

"Getting out of a coach," replied Oliver. "I didn’t have the chance to
speak to him, but I took the number of the house he went into. Here it
is."  And he flourished a scrap of paper delightedly.  "Oh, let us go
there at once!"

Rose read the address eagerly, and decided to put the discovery to
account.  Not alone would Oliver be gratified, but Mr. Brownlow might be
the very friend they needed at this momentous time.

"Quick!" she said; "tell them to fetch a hackney-coach, and be ready to
go with me.  I will take you there directly, without a minute’s loss of
time.  I will only tell my aunt that we are going out for an hour, and
be ready as soon as you are."

Oliver needed no prompting to hasten, and in little more than five
minutes they were on their way.  When they arrived at the address noted,
Rose left Oliver in the coach, under pretence of preparing his friend to
receive him; and sending up her card by the servant, requested to see
Mr. Brownlow on very pressing business.  The servant soon returned, to
beg that she would walk upstairs; and following him into an upper room,
Miss Maylie was presented to an elderly gentleman of benevolent
appearance, in a bottle-green coat.

"Dear me," said the gentleman, hastily rising, with great politeness, "I
beg your pardon, young lady—-I imagined it was some importunate person
who—I beg you will excuse me. Be seated, pray."

"Mr. Brownlow, I believe, sir?" said Rose.

"That is my name."

"I shall surprise you very much, I have no doubt," said Rose, naturally
embarrassed; "but you once showed great kindness to a very dear young
friend of mine, and I am sure you will take an interest in hearing of
him again."

"Indeed!" said Mr. Brownlow.

"Oliver Twist, as you knew him," said Rose.

Mr. Brownlow was naturally surprised, but said nothing for a few
moments.  Then looking straight into her eyes, he remarked quietly but
earnestly, "Believe me, my dear young lady, if you can tell me good news
of that child, or lift the shadow which rests upon his name, you will be
doing me the greatest service."

Rose at once related in a few words all that had befallen Oliver since
leaving Mr. Brownlow’s house; how he had searched for him but had only
seen him that very day; and finally of the new danger which threatened
the boy.

You may believe that Mr. Brownlow sat very straight, upon the extreme
edge of his chair, during the latter part of this recital.

"The poor lad!" he exclaimed; "but why have you not brought him with
you?"

"I wished to talk with you alone about this plot.  He does not know of
it.  But"—smilingly—"I believe he is now waiting in the coach at the
door."

"At this door?" cried Mr. Brownlow.  And without another word he rushed
from the room.

In less than a minute he was back again, lugging Oliver in bodily and
both laughing—yes, and shedding tears—at the same time.

Then after the jolliest of visits, Rose and Oliver took their leave for
the present; but not before Mr. Brownlow had told Rose privately that he
would turn his whole attention to the new conspiracy.

Nancy had promised to meet Rose on London Bridge, a few nights later,
and Mr. Brownlow determined to be there also.  In the meantime he made
other plans for capturing the rogues.




                      *IV.  THE END OF EVIL DAYS*


Now, unbeknown to Nancy, Fagin the Jew had become suspicious of her, and
had set a spy upon her heels. This spy was none other than Noah
Claypole, the undertaker’s apprentice, whom Oliver had so soundly
thrashed.  Noah had lately come to London to try his fortune in any
underhand way that might arise.  The Jew was always on the lookout for
just such fellows as he.  So they soon struck a bargain.

On the night when Nancy set forth to keep her appointment on the Bridge,
Noah was kept busy darting from pillar to post, but all the time keeping
her in sight.  When she met Rose and Mr. Brownlow, the spy quickly slunk
behind an abutment where he could hear every word of what she said.  And
you may be sure he lost no time in taking his story back to the Jew.

Bill Sikes had just returned, in the early morning, from a
house-breaking jaunt, and was as usual in an ugly mood.  A word from the
Jew about Nancy’s defection set his brain on fire with hatred against
the girl.  He hastened to her room, and, disregarding all her appeals
for mercy, struck her lifeless to the floor.

This murder proved the beginning of the end for all the gang.  Mr.
Brownlow had already set the police to work, and now offered a large
personal reward for Sikes’s arrest.  The murderer was tracked in and
about the city for several days, until he finally hung himself in
endeavoring to escape from the roof of a house.

Fagin the Jew was captured at last, and for his share in this crime, and
his other wickednesses was condemned to death.  A great popular clamor
had been aroused against him, and he was to be hung without delay.

In the hope that the Jew would throw some light upon Monks and some
secret papers which Mr. Brownlow had traced, that gentleman took Oliver
with him to the prison to see Fagin on his last night upon earth.

"Is the young gentleman to come, too, sir?" said the man whose duty it
was to conduct them.  "It’s not a sight for children, sir."

"It is not indeed, my friend,", rejoined Mr. Brownlow; "but my business
with this man is intimately connected with him; and as this child has
seen him in the full career of his success and villany, I think it
well—even at the cost of some pain and fear—that he should see him now."

These few words had been said apart, so as to be inaudible to Oliver.
The man touched his hat; and glancing at Oliver with some curiosity,
opened another gate, opposite to that by which they had entered, and led
them on, through dark and winding ways, to the cell.

The condemned criminal was seated on his bed, rocking himself from side
to side, with a countenance more like that of a snared beast than the
face of a man.  His mind was evidently wandering to his old life, for he
continued to mutter, without appearing conscious of their presence
otherwise than as a part of his vision.

"Good boy, Charley—well done!"—he mumbled.  "Oliver too, ha! ha! ha!
Oliver too—quite the gentleman now—quite the—take that boy away to bed!"

The jailer took the disengaged hand of Oliver, and, whispering to him
not to be alarmed, looked on without speaking.

"Take him away to bed!" cried the Jew. "Do you hear me, some of you?  He
has been the—the—somehow the cause of all this!"

"Fagin," said the jailer.

"That’s me!" cried the Jew, falling, instantly, into the attitude of
listening he had assumed upon his trial.  "An old man, my Lord; a very
old, old man!"

"Here," said the turnkey, laying his hand upon his breast to keep him
down.  "Here’s somebody wants to see you, to ask you some questions, I
suppose.  Fagin, Fagin!  Are you a man?"

"I sha’n’t be one long," replied the Jew, looking up with a face
retaining no human expression but rage and terror.  "Strike them all
dead!  What right have they to butcher me?"

As he spoke he caught sight of Oliver and Mr. Brownlow.  Shrinking to
the farthest corner of the seat, he demanded to know what they wanted
there.

"Steady," said the turnkey, still holding him down.  "Now, sir, tell him
what you want—quick if you please, for he grows worse as the time gets
on."

"You have some papers," said Mr. Brownlow, advancing, "which were placed
in your hands, for better security, by a man called Monks."

"It’s all a lie together," replied the Jew. "I haven’t one—not one."

"For the love of God," said Mr. Brownlow, solemnly, "do not tell a lie
now, upon the very verge of death; but tell me where they are.  You know
that Sikes is dead; and that there is no hope of any farther gain.
Where are those papers?"

"Oliver," cried the Jew, beckoning to him. "Here, here!  Let me whisper
to you."

"I am not afraid," said Oliver, in a firm voice, as he relinquished Mr.
Brownlow’s hand.

"The papers," said the Jew, drawing him towards him, "are in a canvas
bag, in a hole a little way up the chimney in the top front room. I want
to talk to you, my dear.  I want to talk to you."

"Yes, yes," returned Oliver.  "Let me say a prayer.  Do!  Let me say one
prayer.  Say only one, upon your knees, with me, and we will talk till
morning."

"Outside, outside," replied the Jew, pushing the boy before him towards
the door, and looking vacantly over his head.  "Say I’ve gone to
sleep—they’ll believe _you_.  You can get me out, if you take me so.
Now then, now then!"

"Oh!  God forgive this wretched man!" cried the boy, with a burst of
tears.

"That’s right, that’s right," said the Jew. "That’ll help us on.  This
door first.  If I shake and tremble, as we pass the gallows, don’t you
mind, but hurry on.  Now, now, now!"

"Have you nothing else to ask him, sir?" inquired the turnkey.

"No other question," replied Mr. Brownlow. "If I hoped we could recall
him to a sense of his position—"

"Nothing will do that, sir," replied the man, shaking his head.  "You
had better leave him."

The door of the cell opened and the attendants returned.

"Press on, press on," cried the Jew.  "Softly, but not so slow.  Faster,
faster!"

The men laid hands upon him, and disengaging Oliver from his grasp, held
him back.  He struggled with the power of desperation for an instant,
and then sent up cry upon cry that penetrated even those massive walls
and rang in their ears until they reached the open yard.

And this—thought Oliver shudderingly—was the last of the Jew—the man
from whose clutches he had so narrowly escaped!

Noah Claypole turned state’s evidence at this time, and thus escaped the
law.  Dawkins, the Artful Dodger, had been caught picking pockets and
was transported from the country.  Charley Bates was so unnerved by the
fate of Nancy, and the swift punishment of his companions, that he
reformed and became an honest, hard-working young man.

And, finally, what of Monks?  He was shadowed and seized by Mr.
Brownlow’s agents, and proved to be none other than the half-brother of
Oliver Twist!  Their father was dead, but he had left a will providing
for the boy also.  And it was on this account that Monks had wished to
get him out of the way and had employed Fagin in trying to ruin the lad.

The papers were found, as the Jew had indicated, and they not only
cleared up Oliver’s past history, but proved his right to a share in a
considerable family estate.  Mr. Brownlow had known Monks’s father in
their early days, and now used this knowledge to wring a full confession
from the villain.

Another strange secret came to light also, at this time.  Rose Maylie
was found to be a younger sister of Oliver’s dead mother, and therefore
the boy’s own aunt.

"Not aunt!" cried Oliver, when he heard this amazing but delightful
news; "I’ll never call her aunt!  Sister, my own dear sister, that
something taught my heart to love so dearly from the first!  Rose, dear
darling Rose!"

And the two orphans, no longer alone but united and surrounded by loving
friends, were clasped in each other’s arms.




                  *THE STORY OF SMIKE AND HIS TEACHER*



           *I.  HOW NICHOLAS NICKLEBY CAME TO DOTHEBOYS HALL*


"Education.—At Mr. Wackford Squeers’s Academy, Dotheboys Hall, at the
delightful village of Dotheboys, near Greta Bridge in Yorkshire, Youth
are boarded, clothed, booked, furnished with pocket-money, provided with
all necessaries, instructed in all languages living and dead,
mathematics, orthography, geometry, astronomy, trigonometry, the use of
the globes, algebra, single stick (if required), writing, arithmetic,
fortification, and every other branch of classical literature.  Terms,
twenty guineas per annum.  No extras, no vacations, and diet
unparalleled.  Mr. Squeers is in town, and attends daily, from one till
four, at the Saracen’s Head, Snow Hill.  N.B. An able assistant wanted.
Annual salary £5.  A Master of Arts would be preferred."

To Nicholas Nickleby, a young man of nineteen, who had come to London
seeking his fortune, this advertisement in a daily paper seemed a
godsend—that is, provided he could secure the position referred to in
the last two lines.  It is true the salary was not large; but he
reflected that his board and living would be included, and that a young
man of his education and ability would be bound to rise.  He even
fancied himself, in a rosy-colored future, at the head of this model
school, Dotheboys Hall, in the delightful village of Dotheboys, near
Greta Bridge, in Yorkshire.

But it would not do to sit dreaming.  Some one else might snap up this
golden opportunity. Nicholas brushed his clothes carefully and lost no
time in calling upon Mr. Squeers, at the tavern called the Saracen’s
Head.

Mr. Squeers’s appearance was not prepossessing. He had but one eye
which, while it was unquestionably useful, was decidedly not ornamental,
being of a greenish gray and in shape resembling the fan-light of a
street-door.  The blank side of his face was much wrinkled and puckered
up, which gave him a very sinister appearance, especially when he
smiled, at which times his expression bordered closely on the villanous.
He was about two or three and fifty, and a trifle below the middle size;
and he wore a white neckerchief with long ends, and a suit of scholastic
black.

Mr. Squeers was standing in a box by one of the coffee-room fireplaces,
fitted with one such table as is usually seen in coffee-rooms.  In a
corner of the seat was a very small deal trunk, tied round with a scanty
piece of cord; and on the trunk was perched—his lace-up half-boots and
corduroy trousers dangling in the air—a diminutive boy, with his
shoulders drawn up to his ears, and his hands planted on his knees, who
glanced timidly at the schoolmaster, from time to time, with evident
dread.  Presently the boy chanced to give a violent sneeze.

"Hallo, sir!" growled the schoolmaster, turning round.  "What’s that,
sir?"

"Nothing, please, sir," replied the little boy.

"Nothing, sir!" exclaimed Mr. Squeers.

"Please, sir, I sneezed," rejoined the boy, trembling till the little
trunk shook under him.

"Oh! sneezed, did you?" retorted Mr. Squeers. "Then what did you say
’nothing’ for, sir?"

In default of a better answer to this question, the little boy screwed a
couple of knuckles into each of his eyes and began to cry; wherefore Mr.
Squeers knocked him off the trunk with a blow on one side of his face,
and knocked him on again with a blow on the other.

"Wait till I get you down to Yorkshire, my young gentleman," said Mr.
Squeers, "and then I’ll give you the rest.  Will you hold that noise,
sir?"

"Ye-ye-yes," sobbed the little boy, rubbing his face very hard.

"Then do so at once, sir," said Squeers. "Do you hear?"

The little boy rubbed his face harder, as if to keep the tears back;
and, beyond alternately sniffing and choking, gave no farther vent to
his emotions.

"Mr. Squeers," said the waiter, looking in at this juncture, "here’s a
gentleman asking for you at the bar."

"Show the gentleman in, Richard," replied Mr. Squeers, in a soft voice.
"Put your handkerchief in your pocket, you little scoundrel!"

The schoolmaster had scarcely uttered these words in a fierce whisper,
when the stranger entered.  Affecting not to see him, Mr. Squeers
feigned to be intent upon mending a pen, and offering benevolent advice
to his youthful pupil.

"My dear child," said Mr. Squeers, "all people have their trials.  This
early trial of yours that is fit to make your little heart burst and
your very eyes come out of your head with crying, what is it?  Nothing;
less than nothing.  You are leaving your friends, but you will have a
father in me, my dear, and a mother in Mrs. Squeers.  At the delightful
village of Dotheboys, near Greta Bridge in Yorkshire, where youth are
boarded, clothed, booked, washed, furnished with pocket-money, provided
with all necessaries—"

"Mr. Squeers, I believe," said Nicholas Nickleby, as that worthy man
stopped to cough.

"The same, sir.  What can I do for you?"

"I came in answer to an advertisement in this morning’s paper," said
Nicholas.  "I believe you desire an assistant."

"I do, sir," rejoined Mr. Squeers, coolly; "but if you are applying for
the place, don’t you think you’re too young?"

"I hope not, sir, and I have a fair education. I could—"

"Could what?" interrupted the schoolmaster. "Could you lick the boys if
they needed it?"

"I do not usually believe in that sort of punishment—" hesitated
Nicholas.

"Could you do it?" urged Mr. Squeers.

"I think—if they needed it—I could lick anybody in your school," smiled
Nicholas.

"Well, why didn’t you say so?  I guess I had better take you.  I’ve got
to leave town at eight o’clock to-morrow morning, and haven’t time to
look around.  So be on hand sharp!"

Nicholas thanked him and promised to be on hand.

The next day he was as good as his word, and reached the tavern a little
in advance of the appointed hour.

He found Mr. Squeers sitting at breakfast, with the little boy before
noticed, and four others who had turned up by some lucky chance since
the interview of the previous day, ranged in a row on the opposite seat.
Mr. Squeers had before him a small measure of coffee, a plate of hot
toast, and a cold round of beef; but he was at that moment intent on
preparing breakfast for the little boys.

"This is twopenn’orth of milk, is it, waiter?" said he, looking down
into a large blue mug, and slanting it gently, so as to get an accurate
view of the quantity of liquid contained in it.

"That’s twopenn’orth, sir," replied the waiter.

"What a rare article milk is, to be sure, in London!" said Mr. Squeers,
with a sigh. "Just fill that mug up with lukewarm water, William, will
you?"

"To the wery top, sir?" inquired the waiter. "Why, the milk will be
drownded."

"Never you mind that," replied Mr. Squeers. "Serve it right for being so
dear!  You ordered that thick bread and butter for three, did you?"

"Coming directly, sir."

"You needn’t hurry yourself," said Squeers; "there’s plenty of time.
Conquer your passions, boys, and don’t be eager after vittles."  As he
uttered this moral precept, Mr. Squeers took a large bite out of the
cold beef, and recognized Nicholas.

"Sit down, Mr. Nickleby," said Squeers. "Here we are, a breakfasting,
you see!"

Nicholas did not see that anybody was breakfasting except Mr. Squeers;
but he bowed with all becoming reverence, and looked as cheerful as he
could.

"Oh! that’s the milk and water, is it, William?" said Squeers.  "Very
good; don’t forget the bread and butter presently."

At this fresh mention of the bread and butter the five little boys
looked very eager, and followed the waiter out with their eyes;
meanwhile Mr. Squeers tasted the milk and water.

"Ah!" said that gentleman, smacking his lips, "here’s richness!  Think
of the many beggars and orphans in the streets that would be glad of
this, little boys.  A shocking thing hunger is, isn’t it, Mr. Nickleby?"

"Very shocking, sir," said Nicholas.

"When I say number one," pursued Mr. Squeers, putting the mug before the
children, "the boy on the left hand nearest the window may take a drink;
and when I say number two, the boy next him will go in, and so till we
come to number five, which is the last boy. Are you ready?"

"Yes, sir," cried all the little boys with great eagerness.

"That’s right," said Squeers, calmly getting on with his breakfast;
"keep ready till I tell you to begin.  Subdue your appetites, my dears,
and you’ve conquered human natur. This is the way we inculcate strength
of mind, Mr. Nickleby," said the schoolmaster, turning to Nicholas, and
speaking with his mouth very full of beef and toast.

Nicholas murmured something—he knew not what—in reply; and the little
boys, dividing their gaze between the mug, the bread and butter (which
had by this time arrived), and every morsel which Mr. Squeers took into
his mouth, remained with strained eyes in torments of expectation.

"Thank God for a good breakfast," said Squeers when he had finished.
"Number one may take a drink."

Number one seized the mug ravenously, and had just drunk enough to make
him wish for more, when Mr. Squeers gave the signal for number two, who
gave up at the same interesting moment to number three; and the process
was repeated until the milk and water terminated with number five.

"And now," said the schoolmaster, dividing the bread and butter for
three into as many portions as there were children, "you had better look
sharp with your breakfast, for the horn will blow in a minute or two,
and then every boy leaves off."

Permission being thus given to fall to, the boys began to eat
voraciously and in desperate haste; while the schoolmaster (who was in
high good-humor after his meal) picked his teeth with a fork, and looked
smilingly on.  In a very short time the horn was heard.

"I thought it wouldn’t be long," said Squeers, jumping up and producing
a little basket from under the seat; "put what you haven’t had time to
eat in here, boys!  You’ll want it on the road!"

Nicholas was considerably startled by these very economical
arrangements; but he had no time to reflect upon them, for the little
boys had to be got up to the top of the coach, and this task was in his
department.  But soon they were all stowed away, and the coach started
off with a flourish.

The journey proved long and hard, however. They were detained several
times by the bad roads and inclement weather, so that it was not until
nightfall of the second day that they reached their destination.

"Jump out," said Squeers.  "Hallo there! come and put this horse up.  Be
quick, will you!"

While the schoolmaster was uttering these and other impatient cries,
Nicholas had time to observe that the school was a long, cold-looking
house, one story high, with a few straggling outbuildings behind, and a
barn and stable adjoining.  After the lapse of a minute or two, the
noise of somebody unlocking the yard-gate was heard, and presently a
tall, lean boy, with a lantern in his hand, issued forth.

"Is that you, Smike?" cried Squeers.

"Yes, sir," replied the boy.

"Then why the devil didn’t you come before?"

"Please, sir, I fell asleep over the fire," answered Smike, with
humility.

"Fire! what fire?  Where’s there a fire?" demanded the schoolmaster,
sharply.

"Only in the kitchen, sir," replied the boy. "Missus said, as I was
sitting up, I might go in there for a warm."

"Your Missus is a fool," retorted Squeers. "You’d have been a deuced
deal more wakeful in the cold, I’ll engage."

By this time Mr. Squeers had dismounted; and after ordering the boy to
see to the pony, and to take care that he hadn’t any more corn that
night, he told Nicholas to wait at the front door a minute while he went
round and let him in.

A host of unpleasant misgivings, which had been crowding upon Nicholas
during the whole journey, thronged into his mind with redoubled force
when he was left alone.  And as he looked up at the dreary house and
dark windows, and upon the wild country round, covered with snow, he
felt a depression of heart and spirit which he had never experienced
before.

Presently he was ushered into a cheerless-looking parlor where stood a
large, angular woman about half a head taller than Mr. Squeers.

"This is the new young man, my dear," said that gentleman.

"Oh," replied Mrs. Squeers, nodding her head at Nicholas, and eyeing him
coldly from top to toe.

"He’ll take a meal with us to-night," said Squeers, "and go among the
boys to-morrow morning.  You can give him a shakedown here, to-night,
can’t you?"

"We must manage it somehow," replied the lady.  "You don’t much mind how
you sleep, I suppose, sir?"

"No, indeed," replied Nicholas, "I am not particular."

"That’s lucky," said Mrs. Squeers.  And as the lady’s humor was
considered to lie chiefly in retort, Mr. Squeers laughed heartily, and
seemed to expect that Nicholas should do the same.

After some conversation between the master and mistress relative to the
success of Mr. Squeers’s trip, and the people who had paid, and the
people who had made default in payment, a young servant girl brought in
a Yorkshire pie and some cold beef, which being set upon the table, the
boy Smike appeared with a jug of ale.

Mr. Squeers was emptying his great-coat pockets of letters to different
boys, and other small documents, which he had brought down in them.  The
boy glanced, with an anxious and timid expression, at the papers, as if
with a sickly hope that one among them might relate to him.  The look
was a very painful one, and went to Nicholas’s heart at once, for it
told a long and very sad history.

It induced him to consider the boy more attentively, and he was
surprised to observe the extraordinary mixture of garments which formed
his dress.  Although he could not have been less than eighteen or
nineteen years old, and was tall for that age, he wore a skeleton suit,
such as is usually put upon very little boys, and which, though most
absurdly short in the arms and legs, was quite wide enough for his thin
body.  In order that the lower part of his legs might be in perfect
keeping with this singular dress, he had a very large pair of boots,
originally made for tops, which might have been once worn by some stout
farmer, but were now too patched and tattered for a beggar. He was lame;
and as he feigned to be busy in arranging the table, he glanced at the
letters with a look so keen, and yet so dispirited and hopeless, that
Nicholas could hardly bear to watch him.

"What are you bothering about there, Smike?" cried Mrs. Squeers; "let
the things alone, can’t you?"

"Eh!" said Squeers, looking up.  "Oh! it’s you, is it?"

"Yes, sir," replied the youth, pressing his hands together, as though to
control, by force, the nervous wandering of his fingers; "Is there—"

"Well!" said Squeers.

"Have you—did anybody—has nothing been heard—about me?"

"Devil a bit," replied Squeers, testily.

The lad withdrew his eyes, and, putting his hand to his face, moved
towards the door.

"Not a word," resumed Squeers, "and never will be.  Now, this is a
pretty sort of thing, isn’t it, that you should have been left here all
these years, and no money paid after the first six—nor no notice taken,
nor no clue to be got who you belong to?  It’s a pretty sort of thing
that I should have to feed a great fellow like you, and never hope to
get one penny for it, isn’t it?"

The boy put his hand to his head as if he were making an effort to
recollect something, and then, looking vacantly at his questioner,
gradually broke into a smile, and limped away.

"I’ll tell you what, Squeers," remarked his wife, as the door closed, "I
think that young chap’s turning silly."

"I hope not," said the schoolmaster; "for he’s a handy fellow
out-of-doors, and worth his meat and drink anyway.  I should think he’d
have wit enough for us, though, if he was."

Supper being over, Mr. Squeers yawned fearfully and was of opinion that
it was high time to go to bed.  Upon this, Mrs. Squeers and a servant
dragged in a small straw mattress and a couple of blankets, and arranged
them into a couch for Nicholas.

"We’ll put you into a regular bedroom with the boys to-morrow,
Nickleby," said Squeers. "Good-night.  Seven o’clock, in the morning,
mind."

The next morning, when Nicholas appeared in the main room, he found Mrs.
Squeers very much distressed.

"I can’t find the school spoon," she said.

"Never mind it, my dear," observed Squeers in a soothing manner; "it’s
of no consequence."

"No consequence! why, how you talk!" retorted Mrs. Squeers, sharply;
"isn’t it brimstone morning?"

"I forgot, my dear," rejoined Squeers; "yes, it certainly is.  We purify
the boys’ bloods now and then, Nickleby."

"Purify fiddlesticks’ ends!" said his lady. "Don’t think, young man,
that we go to the expense of brimstone and molasses, just to purify
them; because if you think we carry on the business in that way, you’ll
find yourself mistaken, and so I tell you plainly."

"My dear," said Squeers, frowning.  "Hem!"

"Oh! nonsense," rejoined Mrs. Squeers. "If the young man comes to be a
teacher here, let him understand, at once, that we don’t want any
foolery about the boys.  They have the brimstone and treacle, partly
because if they hadn’t something or other in the way of medicine they’d
be always ailing and giving a world of trouble, and partly because it
spoils their appetites and comes cheaper than breakfast and dinner.  So
it does them good and us good at the same time, and that’s fair enough,
I’m sure."

A vast deal of searching and rummaging ensued, and it proving fruitless,
Smike was called in, and pushed by Mrs. Squeers and boxed by Mr.
Squeers; which course of treatment brightening his intellects, enabled
him to suggest that possibly Mrs. Squeers might have the spoon in her
pocket—as indeed turned out to be the case.  But as Mrs. Squeers had
previously protested that she was quite certain she had not got it,
Smike received another box on the ear for presuming to contradict his
mistress; so that he gained nothing of advantage by his idea.

"But come," said Squeers, "let’s go to the schoolroom; and lend me a
hand with my school-coat, will you?"

Nicholas assisted his master to put on an old shooting-jacket; and
Squeers, arming himself with his cane, led the way across a yard, to a
door in the rear of the house.

"There," said the schoolmaster, as they stepped in together; "this is
our shop, Nickleby!"

It was such a crowded scene, and there were so many objects to attract
attention, that, at first, Nicholas stared about him, really without
seeing anything at all.  By degrees, however, the place resolved itself
into a bare and dirty room, with a couple of windows, stopped up with
old copybooks and paper.  There were two rickety desks, cut and notched,
and inked in every possible way; two or three forms; a detached desk for
Squeers, and another for his assistant.  The ceiling was supported, like
that of a barn, by crossbeams and rafters, and the walls were so stained
and discolored that it was impossible to tell whether they had ever been
touched with paint or whitewash.

But the pupils!  How the last faint traces of hope, the remotest
glimmering of any good to be derived from his efforts in this den, faded
from the mind of Nicholas as he looked in dismay around!  Pale and
haggard faces, lank and bony figures, children with the countenances of
old men, boys of stunted growth, and others whose long, meagre legs
would hardly bear their stooping bodies, all crowded on the view
together.

[Illustration: NICHOLAS AND SMIKE.]

And yet this scene, painful as it was, had its grotesque features.  Mrs.
Squeers stood at one of the desks, presiding over an immense basin of
brimstone and treacle, of which delicious compound she administered a
large instalment to each boy in succession, using for the purpose a
common wooden spoon, which might have been originally manufactured for
some gigantic top, and which widened every young gentleman’s mouth
considerably; they being all obliged, under heavy penalties, to take in
the whole of the bowl at a gulp.

"Now," said Squeers, giving the desk a great rap with his cane which
made half the little boys nearly jump out of their boots, "is that
physicking over?"

"Just over," said Mrs. Squeers, choking the last boy in her hurry, and
tapping the crown of his head with the wooden spoon to restore him.
"Here, you Smike; take away now.  Look sharp!"

Smike shuffled out with the basin, and Mrs. Squeers having called up a
little boy with a curly head and wiped her hands upon it, hurried out
after him into a species of wash-house, where there was a small fire and
a large kettle, together with a number of little wooden bowls which were
arranged upon a board.  Into these bowls Mrs. Squeers, assisted by the
hungry servant, poured a brown composition, which looked like diluted
pincushions without the covers, and was called porridge.  A minute wedge
of brown bread was inserted in each bowl, and when they had eaten their
porridge by means of the bread, the boys ate the bread itself, and had
finished their breakfast; whereupon Mr. Squeers said, in a solemn voice,
"For what we have received, may the Lord make us truly thankful!"—and
went away to his own.

Nicholas filled his stomach with a bowl of porridge, for much the same
reason which induces some savages to swallow earth—lest they should be
hungry when there is nothing to eat.  Having disposed of a slice of
bread and butter, allotted to him in virtue of his office, he sat
himself down to wait for school-time.

He could not but observe how silent and sad the boys all seemed to be.
There was none of the noise and clamor of a schoolroom; none of its
boisterous play or hearty mirth.  The children sat crouching and
shivering together, and seemed to lack the spirit to move about. The
only pupil who seemed at all playful was Master Squeers, son of the
master, and as his chief amusement was to tread upon the other boys’
toes in his new boots, his flow of spirits was rather disagreeable than
otherwise.

After some half-hour’s delay Mr. Squeers reappeared, and the boys took
their places and their books, of which latter there might be about one
to eight learners.  A few minutes having elapsed, during which Mr.
Squeers looked very profound, as if he had a perfect apprehension of
what was inside all the books, and could say every word of their
contents by heart if he only chose to take the trouble, that gentleman
called up the first class.

Obedient to this summons there ranged themselves in front of the
schoolmaster’s desk half-a-dozen scarecrows, out at knees and elbows,
one of whom placed a torn and filthy book beneath his learned eye.

"This is the first class in English spelling and philosophy, Nickleby,"
said Squeers, beckoning Nicholas to stand beside him.  "We’ll get up a
Latin one, and hand that over to you. Now, then, where’s the first boy?"

"Please, sir, he’s cleaning the back parlor window," said the temporary
head of the class.

"So he is, to be sure," rejoined Squeers. "We go upon the practical mode
of teaching, Nickleby; the regular education system. C-l-e-a-n, clean,
verb active, to make bright, to scour.  When the boy knows this out of
book, he goes and does it.  Second boy, what’s a horse?"

"A beast, sir," replied the boy.

"So it is," said Squeers, "and as you’re perfect in that, go and look
after _my_ horse, and rub him down well, or I’ll rub you down.  The rest
of the class go and draw water till somebody tells you to leave off, for
it’s washing-day to-morrow, and they want the coppers filled."

So saying, he dismissed the first class to their experiments in
practical philosophy, and eyed Nicholas with a look, half cunning and
half doubtful, as if he were not altogether certain what he might think
of him by this time.

"That’s the way we do it, Nickleby," he said, after a pause.

Nicholas shrugged his shoulders in a manner that was scarcely
perceptible, and said he saw it was.

"And a very good way it is, too," said Squeers.  "Now, just take them
fourteen little boys and hear them some reading, because, you know, you
must begin to be useful.  Idling about here won’t do."

Mr. Squeers said this, as if it had suddenly occurred to him, either
that he must not say too much to his assistant, or that his assistant
did not say enough to him in praise of the establishment.  The children
were arranged in a semicircle round the new master, and he was soon
listening to their dull, drawling recital of those stories of interest
which are to be found in the spelling books.

In this exciting occupation the morning lagged heavily on.  At one
o’clock the boys, having previously had their appetites thoroughly taken
away by stir-about and potatoes, sat down in the kitchen to some hard
salt beef, of which Nicholas was graciously permitted to take his
portion to his own solitary desk, to eat it there in peace.  After this,
there was another hour of crouching in the schoolroom and shivering with
cold; and this was a fair sample of the school day at Dotheboys Hall.

There was a small stove in the corner of the room, and by it Nicholas
sat down, when the school was dismissed, so heavy-hearted that it seemed
to him as though every bit of joy had gone out of the world.  The
cruelty and coarseness of Squeers were revolting, and yet Nicholas did
not know how to resent it or which way to turn.  He had cast his lot
here, and here he must abide.

As he was absorbed in these meditations, he all at once encountered the
upturned face of Smike, who was on his knees before the stove, picking a
few stray cinders from the hearth and planting them on the fire.  He had
paused to steal a look at Nicholas, and when he saw that he was
observed, shrank back, as if expecting a blow.

"You need not fear me," said Nicholas, kindly.  "Are you cold?"

"N-n-o."

"You are shivering."

"I am not cold," replied Smike, quickly. "I am used to it."

There was such an obvious fear of giving offence in his manner, and he
was such a timid, broken-spirited creature, that Nicholas could not help
exclaiming, "Poor fellow!"

If he had struck the drudge, he would have slunk away without a word.
But now he burst into tears.

"Oh, dear, oh, dear!" he cried, covering his face with his cracked and
horny hands.  "My heart will break.  It will, it will!"

"Hush!" said Nicholas, laying his hand upon his shoulder.  "Be a man;
you are nearly one by years, God help you."

"By years!" cried Smike.  "Oh, dear, dear, how many of them!  How many
of them since I was a little child, younger than any that are here now!
Where are they all?"

"Whom do you speak of?" inquired Nicholas, wishing to rouse the poor,
half-witted creature to reason.  "Tell me."

"My friends," he replied, "myself—my—oh! what sufferings mine have
been!"

"There is always hope," said Nicholas; he knew not what to say.

"No," rejoined the other, "no; none for me.  Do you remember the boy
that died here?"

"I was not here, you know," said Nicholas, gently; "but what of him?"

"Why," replied the youth, drawing closer to his questioner’s side, "I
was with him at night, and when it was all silent he cried no more for
friends he wished to come and sit with him, but began to see faces round
his bed that came from home; he said they smiled, and talked to him; and
he died at last lifting his head to kiss them.  Do you hear?"

"Yes, yes," rejoined Nicholas.

"What faces will smile on me when I die!" cried his companion,
shivering.  "Who will talk to me in those long nights!  They cannot come
from home; they would frighten me, if they did, for I don’t know what it
is, and shouldn’t know them.  Pain and fear, pain and fear for me, alive
or dead.  No hope, no hope!"

The bell rang to bed, and the boy, subsiding at the sound into his usual
listless state, crept away as if anxious to avoid notice.  It was with a
heavy heart that Nicholas soon afterwards—no, not retired; there was no
retirement there—followed to his dirty and crowded dormitory.




             *II.  HOW SMIKE WENT AWAY FROM DOTHEBOYS HALL*


Nicholas was of a naturally optimistic temper, however, and he lost as
little time as possible brooding over his difficulties.  Instead he
began at once to try to make the school something more than a farce.  He
arranged a few regular lessons for the boys, and he treated the poor,
half-starved pupils with such gentleness and sympathy that they passed
from dumb amazement at the first to blind devotion.  Indeed, there was
not one of them who would not have lain down cheerfully and let him walk
over his body; and the most devoted of them all was Smike.

Nicholas was the one ray of sunlight that had ever come into this
wretched creature’s life.  And in return, Smike now followed him to and
fro, with an ever restless desire to serve or help him; anticipating
such little wants as his humble ability could supply, and content only
to be near him.  He would sit beside him for hours, looking patiently
into his face; and a word would brighten up his careworn visage, and
call into it a passing gleam, even of happiness.  He was an altered
being; he had an object now; and that object was, to show his attachment
to the only person—that person a stranger—who had treated him, not to
say with kindness, but like a human creature.

Needless to say, Squeers speedily took a dislike to Nicholas.  He knew
of the scarcely concealed disdain with which his assistant regarded his
methods.  Squeers was jealous, also, of the influence which Nicholas had
so soon acquired with the boys.  Smike’s slavish affection was speedily
discovered, and the crafty master was mean enough to strike at Nicholas
through him.

Upon this poor being all the spleen and ill-humor that could not be
vented on Nicholas were unceasingly bestowed.  Drudgery would have been
nothing—Smike was well used to that.  Buffetings inflicted without cause
would have been equally a matter of course; for to them also he had
served a long and weary apprenticeship; but it was no sooner observed
that he had become attached to Nicholas, than stripes and blows, stripes
and blows, morning, noon, and night, were his only portion. Nicholas saw
it, and ground his teeth at every repetition of the savage and cowardly
attack. But at present he saw no way to aid the boy, for a protest would
mean his own dismissal, and the lot of Smike and the others would become
that much harder.

One day, after especially harsh treatment, the boy sat huddled in a dark
corner by himself, sobbing as though his heart would break. The room was
dark and deserted, when Nicholas entered, but he heard the sound of
weeping and went over and laid his hand on the drudge’s head.

"Do not, for God’s sake!" said Nicholas, in an agitated voice; "I cannot
bear to see you."

"They are more hard with me than ever," sobbed the boy.

"I know it," rejoined Nicholas.  "They are."

"But for you," said the outcast, "I should die.  They would kill me,
they would; I know they would."

"You will do better, poor fellow," replied Nicholas, shaking his head
mournfully, "when I am gone."

